System level control framework (#751)
NREL/GreenHEART: docs/control/system_level_control/control_classifier.md

# System Level Control Technology Performance Classifiers

> To enable a generic system level control framework we need to classify each technology based on how the model, that is included in H2I, can operate within the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable a generic system level control framework we need to classify each technology based on how the model that is included in H2I can operate within the system.
```

```{note}

> While in real life there are a lot of controllable parameters allowing for ramping production up or down for a particular technology (e.g., turbine yaw). The particular model in H2I might not be capable of simulating a modulated response based on an input signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While in real life there are a lot of controllable parameters allowing for ramping production up or down for a particular technology (e.g., wind or solar curtailment), the model of that technology in H2I might not be capable of the same response behavior to input signals.
```

> These classifications are for how the models in H2I are implemented, **not** how the actual physical subsystem might operate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These classifications are for specific H2I dispatch formulations and are based on how the models in H2I are implemented, **not always** on how the actual physical subsystem might operate.
```

This is a useful and necessary distinction that delineates different model capabilities clearly.
```

We have identified five key classifiers that are able to represent the different behaviors that we can expect from the models. Each performance model includes a parameter setting the classifier `_control_classifier`.

Classifier | Meaning | Example Technology Models
-- | -- | --
fixed | Always produces commodity and cannot be controlled or reduced; does not receive a set-point | classical nuclear

> flexible | Produces based on resource; can only reduce (curtail) | wind, solar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flexible | Produces based on resource; can only reduce (curtail) from the maximum generation based on available resource | wind, solar
```

dispatchable | Can modulate consumption/production within bounds; receives a commodity set-point | grid, electrolyzer, NG turbine
storage | Can modulate consumption/production within bounds while tracking SOC | battery, h2 storage, any storage

> feedstock | Are not directly controlled, but useful for SLC to know about to make dispatch decisions | feedstocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feedstock | Are not directly controlled, but useful for SLC to make dispatch decisions | feedstocks
```

> To add a classifier for a particular model it would look something like this in the class:

Reviewer: This is in case someone is adding a new model, correct? All of the control classifiers have been set for current models?

Reviewer 2: This is correct, yep! I'll add a note in the `adding_a_new_technology.md` page to make this more clear

```{python}
_control_classifier = "flexible"
```

## Fixed
A fixed performance model represents anything that always produces at its rated capacity and cannot be controlled or reduced by the system level controller. The SLC reads the output from a fixed technology and subtracts it from the demand, but does not send a set-point back to the technology. A good example of this is a classical nuclear plant model — it produces a constant output that the rest of the system must accommodate.

## Flexible

> A flexible performance model represents anything that can have the output reduced based on a given set point from the system level controller. A good example of this is the PVWatts PySAM solar plant in H2I, the performance of the system is based on the input solar resource. The solar performance does not change based on, for example, an updated set point to the tracking software, but we could limit the power output from the solar performance model based on a given demand set point. To simplify the implementation of applying this curtailment or reduction based on a set point we added a method, `apply_curtailment()` to the `PerformanceBaseClass`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A flexible performance model represents anything that can have the output reduced based on a given set point from the system level controller. A good example of this is the PVWatts PySAM solar plant in H2I; the performance of the system is based on the input solar resource. The solar performance does not change based on, for example, an updated set point to the panel tracking software. However, we could limit the power output from the solar performance model based on a given demand set point. To simplify the implementation of applying this curtailment or reduction based on a set point we added a method, `apply_curtailment()` to the `PerformanceBaseClass`.
```

```{figure} figures/curtailable.png
:width: 70%
:align: center
```

### Apply curtailment based on set_point
Within the `compute()` method in the performance model you can apply the curtailment using the `apply_curtailment()` method.
```
self.apply_curtailment(outputs)
```

> which, applies curtailment to `{commodity}_out` based on `{commodity}_set_point`. There is then `uncurtailed_{commodity}_out` and `{commodity}_out` as outputs from the performance model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which, applies curtailment to `{commodity}_out` based on `{commodity}_set_point`. This adds `uncurtailed_{commodity}_out` and `{commodity}_out` as outputs from the performance model.
```

## Dispatchable

> A dispatchable performance model represents anything that can receive a set point. Any model that has the "dispatchable" control classifier tag is able to receive a set point and change it's behavior based on that set point. There aren't additional special methods to handle this because it's internal to each performance model.

Reviewer: This is a slightly confusing definition since in the previous section we say that flexible technologies also receive a set point, and change their behavior based on it. 
Is flexible a special case of dispatchable?

Reviewer 2: Thanks for asking this, I know there's a fine line between these classifications. I've updated the doc page to better reflect the differences and similarities between them. Please give it a look and see if it's more in-line with your understanding, or if we can change this more!

```{figure} figures/dispatchable.png
:width: 70%
:align: center
```

## Storage

> Storage is a unique control classifier because it assumes that within the model that energy isn't created or destroyed (minus some efficiency losses). While it's technically "dispatchable" in that it can receive and change its performance based on a set point it's handling within H2I is unique because it's attached to storage performance models, which is handled differently than converter performance models. A converter model only has positive (or zero) `{commodity}_out`, whereas a storage model can have positive or negative `{commodity}_out`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Storage is a unique control classifier because it assumes that within the model that energy isn't created or destroyed (minus some efficiency losses). While it's technically "dispatchable" in that it can receive and change its performance based on a set point, its handling within H2I is unique because it's attached to storage performance models, which is handled differently than converter performance models. A converter model only has positive (or zero) `{commodity}_out`, whereas a storage model can have positive or negative `{commodity}_out`.
```

There are two types of cases for the storage control classifier:
1. **with a storage controller**

> When the storage performance model is controlled with a storage-level controller (open-loop or feedback controlled), the system-level controller outputs combined demand, that is always positive to the storage-level controller. The demand is `{commodity}_in` from the technologies upstream of the storage that output the same commodity to the storage performance model and the `remaining_demand`.

Reviewer 3: As discussed, I think the SLC should always communicate set point to the storage controller and the current storage control methods should likely be moved to SLCs, I think this is being worked on.

Reviewer 2: Understood and agreed. I envision this as follow-on work in separate PRs. #749 and #750 are probably the most relevant issues, with a few others coming into play

2. **without a storage controller**
The system-level controller outputs set points to the storage performance model which can be considered charge (negative) and discharge (positive) commands (storage-level set points) to the storage performance model, directly.

```{figure} figures/storage.png
:width: 85%
:align: center
```

## Feedstock

> Another category of control classifiers are feedstocks. The unique thing about feedstocks is that they are considered outside of the controllable system within H2I. While they can't be controlled it can be helpful for controllers to know how much feedstock is available within the system, hence their classification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The feedstocks category is unique in that they are considered outside of the controllable system within H2I. While they can't be controlled, it can be helpful for controllers to know how much feedstock is available within the system, hence their classification.
```

> Another category of control classifiers are feedstocks. The unique thing about feedstocks is that they are considered outside of the controllable system within H2I. While they can't be controlled it can be helpful for controllers to know how much feedstock is available within the system, hence their classification.

Reviewer: Why are then considered outside the system? Does the controller make decisions based on the availability of a feedstock? I think they could be better classified as inputs to the system.

Author: Feedstocks are not controllable but we could imagine that the feedstock availability may be useful for more advanced controllers. Aka - the use-case that motivated this was something like, trying to meet some ammonia production demand and that demand cannot be met because of an insufficient supply of nitrogen feedstock. In that case - the controller may adjust the set points for the hydrogen and electricity technologies differently if it knows that the ammonia demand cannot be met due to the nitrogen supply (which is not controllable)

Reviewer 2: Great Q @genevievestarke and thanks for chiming in here @elenya-grant! I've updated the doc page based on these comments; please give it a looksie and see if it's more clear
